In these days, when all things and memories of the past are at length
become not only subservient to, but submerged by, the matters and needs
of the immediate present, those paths of knowledge that lead into
regions seemingly remote from such needs are somewhat discredited; and
the aims of those that follow them whither they lead are regarded as
quite out of touch with the real interests of life.  Very greatly is
this so with archaeology, and the study of ancient and curious tongues,
and searchings into old thoughts on high and ever-insistent questions;
a public which has hardly time to {12} read more than its daily
newspaper and its weekly novel has denounced--almost dismissed--them,
with many other noble and wonderful things, as 'unpractical,' whatever
that vague and hollow word may mean.

As to those matters which lie very far back, concerning the lands of
several thousand years ago, it is very generally held that they are the
proper and peculiar province of specialists, dry-as-dusts, and persons
with an irreducible minimum of human nature.  It is thought that
knowledge concerning them, not the blank ignorance regarding them that
almost everywhere obtains, is a thing of which to be rather ashamed, a
detrimental possession; in a word, that the subject is not only
unprofitable (a grave offence), but also uninteresting, and therefore
contemptible.  This is a true estimate of general opinion, although
there are those who will, for their own sakes, gainsay it.

When, therefore, I state that one of the writings herein translated has
an age of nearly six thousand years, and that another is but five
hundred years younger, it is likely that many will find this sufficient
reason against further perusal, deeming it impossible that such things
can possess attraction for one not an enthusiast for them.  Yet so few
are the voices across so great a span of years that those among them
having anything to tell us should be welcome exceedingly; whereas, for
the most part, they have cried in the {13} wilderness of neglect
hitherto, or fallen on ears filled with the clamour of more instant
things.

I could show, if this were a fitting place, that Archaeology is not at
all divorced from life, nor even devoid of emotion as subtle and
strange, as swift and moving, as that experienced by those who love and
follow Art.  She, Archaeology, is, for those who know her, full of such
emotion; garbed in an imperishable glamour, she is raised far above the
turmoil of the present on the wings of Imagination.  Her eyes are
sombre with the memory of the wisdom driven from her scattered
sanctuaries; and at her lips wonderful things strive for utterance.  In
her are gathered together the longings and the laughter, the fears and
failures, the sins and splendours and achievements of innumerable
generations of men; and by her we are shown all the elemental and
terrible passions of the unchanging soul of man, to which all cultures
and philosophies are but garments to hide its nakedness; and thus in
her, as in Art, some of us may realise ourselves.  Withal she is
heavy-hearted, making continual lamentation for a glory that has
withered and old hopes without fulfilment; and all her habitations are
laid waste.
As for the true lover of all old and forgotten things, it may justly be
said of him, as of the poet, _Nascitur, non fit_.  For the dreams and
the wonder are with him from the beginning; and in early childhood,
knowing as yet hardly {14} the names of ancient peoples, he is
conscious of, and yearns instinctively toward, an immense and
ever-receding past.  With the one, as with the other, the unaccountable
passion is so knitted into his soul that it will never, among a
thousand distractions and adverse influences, entirely forsake him; nor
can such an one by willing cause it to come or to depart.  He will live
much in imagination, therein treading fair places now enwrapped in
their inevitable shroud of wind-blown sand; building anew temples whose
stones hardly remain one upon the other, consecrate to gods dead as
their multitudes of worshippers; holding converse with the sages who,
with all their lore, could not escape the ultimate oblivion: a
spectator of splendid pageants, a ministrant at strange rites, a
witness to vast tragedies, he also has admittance to the magical
kingdom, to which is added the freedom of the city of Remembrance.  His
care will be to construct, patiently and with much labour, a picture
(which is often less than an outline) of the conditions of the humanity
that has been; and he neither rejects nor despises any relic, however
trivial or unlovely, that will help him, in its degree, to understand
better that humanity or to bridge the wide chasms of his ignorance.
Moreover, great age hallows all things, even the most mean, investing
them with a certain sanctity; and the little sandal of a nameless {15}
child, or the rude amulet placed long ago with weeping on the still
bosom of a friend, will move his heart as strongly by its appeal as the
proud and enduring monument of a great conqueror insatiable of praise.
At times, moving among the tokens of a period that the ravenous years
dare not wholly efface in passing, he hears, calling faintly as from
afar, innumerable voices--the voices of those who, stretching forth in
Sheol eager hands toward Life, greatly desire that some memorial of
them, be it but a name, may survive in the world of men....


Ancient Egypt fares perhaps better than other countries of antiquity at
the hands of the 'general reader,' and sometimes obtains a hearing when
they do not, by reason of its intimate contact at certain periods with
the nation that has brought us the _Old Testament_.  Because of this
the report of it has been with us constantly, and it has nearly become
a symbol in religion.  The stories of Moses and the magicians, and of
the dealings of Abraham and Joseph with Pharaoh, together with the rude
woodcuts of Egyptian taskmasters and cupbearers in family Bibles, have
invested the venerable land with a dreamy mystery; while every one has
heard of 'Rameses, the Pharaoh of the Oppression,' and 'Meneptah, the
Pharaoh of the Exodus.'  And it is possible that for the sake of such
{16} association, if not for his own sake, Ptah-hotep will be
considered worthy of notice.

But in spite of the fact that the Ancient Egyptians enjoy rather more
popularity than their contemporaries, it is evident that the books
which they wrote are closed books to those who have not the glamour of
vanished peoples, and the fascination of mighty cities now made
desolate, strong upon them.

Yet in the heterogeneous and pitiful flotsam that reluctant seas have
washed to us piecemeal from a remote past, there are, as will be shown
later, many things which, although proceeding from a culture and modes
of thought as far removed from our own as they may well be,[1] are
worth the reading, which do not require any special knowledge for their
understanding; and of these are the translations in this book.

The following pages, which, although addressed to the 'general reader,'
may yet be of some assistance to those especially interested in Egypt,
give, among other matters, the place of the Instructions of Ptah-hotep
and Ke'gemni in the 'literature' of Egypt; their place--their {17}
unique place--in the literature of the world; their value historically;
a description of the document in which they were found; what is known
of their authors; a discussion of their contents.


The land of which the Father of History declared that no other country
held so many wonders, has bequeathed us, by various channels, the
rumour and remnant of a strange knowledge.  She has devised us enigmas
insoluble, and rendered up to us signs and messages whose meaning is
dark for all time.  And she has left a religion, 'veiled in allegory
and illustrated by symbol,' as fascinating as impenetrable for those
who approach it.  For into our hands the keys of these things have not
been delivered; wherefore much study of them is a weariness to the
flesh, and of the hazarding of interpretations there is no end.

But apart from the mazes of mythology, the broken ways of history and
the empty letter of a dead faith, there are, as is known to some, and
as this little book professes to show, many documents which are
antique, but not antiquated, possessing interest above the purely
archaeological--the interest called human.  Of these are the tales
which recall, in incident as in style, those of the immortal
collection, full of the whole glamour of the East, the _Thousand Nights
and a Night_.  {18} Such are the love-songs, full of the burning
utterance of desire; the pathetic and even bitter dirges, whose singers
have seen all the works that are done under the sun, and found all to
be vanity and vexation of spirit.  And such also are the didactic poems
for the instruction of youth, which--in poetic phrase and in great
detail--inculcate, among other things, the practice of right conduct as
the price of happiness; a courtesy hardly less considerate than our
own; and a charity which, when certain inevitable shortcomings are
allowed for, bears comparison with almost any later system.  Out of
these there are many that may properly claim a place in a series
bearing the seal of the Wisdom of the East, though they belong only to
the more objective and 'practical' side of that Wisdom.

But, as touching the books here translated--the Instructions of
Ptah-hotep and of Ke'gemni--they possess, apart from the curious nature
of their contents, a feature of the greatest interest, and an adequate
claim on the notice of all persons interested in literature and its
history.  For if the datings and ascriptions in them be accepted as
trustworthy (there is no reason why they should not be so accepted),
they were composed about four thousand years before Christ, and three
thousand five hundred and fifty years before Christ, respectively.  And
the significance of those remote dates is, that they are the oldest
{19} books in the world, the earliest extant specimens of the literary
art.  They stand on the extreme horizon of all that ocean of paper and
ink that has become to us as an atmosphere, a fifth element, an
essential of life.

Books of many kinds had of course been written for centuries before
Ptah-hotep of Memphis summarised, for the benefit of future
generations, the leading principles of morality current in his day;
even before the Vizier, five hundred years earlier, gave to his
children the scroll which they prized above all things on earth;[2] but
those have perished and these remain.  There are lists of titles which
have a large sound, and prayers to the Gods for all good things, on the
tombs and monuments of kings and magnates long before the time of
Ke'gemni; but those are not books in any sense of that word.  Even the
long, strange chants and spells engraven in the Royal Pyramids over
against Memphis are later than the time of Ptah-hotep, and cannot be
called books in their present form, although some of them apparently
originated before the First Dynasty.[3]

Nor do the oldest books of any other country approach these two in
antiquity.  To draw {20} comparisons between them let us, in
imagination, place ourselves at the period at which Ptah-hotep lived,
that is, about B.C. 3550, 'under King Isôsi, living for ever,' and take
a glance at futurity.

The Babylonians are doubtless exercising their literary talents; but
they will leave nothing worthy the name of book to the far posterity of
fifty-four centuries hence.  Thirteen centuries shall pass before
Hammurabi, King of Babylon, drafts the code of laws that will be found
at that time.  Only after two thousand years shall Moses write on the
origin of things, and the Vedas be arranged in their present form.  It
will be two-and-a-half thousand years before the Great King of
Jerusalem will set in order many proverbs and write books so much
resembling, in form and style, that of Ptah-hotep;[4] before the source
and summit of European literature will write his world epics.  For the
space of years between Solomon and ourselves, great though it seem, is
not so great as that between Solomon and Ptah-hotep.


The number of extant texts of the class to which the subjoined
immediately belong is not large in proportion to the rest of Egyptian
MSS., {21} but they seem to be representative of the class, being
diverse in date and subject, but similar in form.  There is great
uniformity in the arrangement of most of them, in the following
respects.  They have as title the word 'Instruction' (_seb'ôyet_), and
are written by a father for the advantage of his son; they are very
poetic in their arrangement of words and phrases, and are usually
divided into short sections or paragraphs by the use of red ink for the
first sentence of each.  Such is the Instruction of Ptah-hotep on
morality (the finest of its class); the Instruction of King Amenemhê'et
on the hollowness of friendship and other matters; the Instruction of
Deu'of, the son of Kherti, on the excellence of the literary life; and
others.  In many respects and in many details they greatly resemble the
didactic works of the _Old Testament_ and _Apocrypha_.

These 'Instructions' were held in high esteem as text-books and writing
exercises in schools--a circumstance to which we owe the preservation
of many of them.  For a considerable number of important and
interesting poems, letters, and narratives are only known to us from
school exercise-books.  The pupil at the 'Chamber of Instruction' wrote
out about three pages of these each day, as a means of improving his
writing, as a model of style in composition, and for purposes of
edification.  These exercises {22} abound in errors of spelling and
grammar, having sometimes the master's corrections elegantly written
above in red.  As may be imagined, a schoolboy's scrawl over three
thousand years old is no easy thing to translate; but _faute de mieux_
the Egyptologist welcomes any version, even the most barbarous.
Fortunately, the MS. from which these translations come is not of this
kind; a detailed description of it may interest some of my readers.

The Prisse Papyrus, which is well known by name and a few extracts to
all persons conversant with Egyptian matters, was acquired in Egypt by
M. Prisse d'Avennes, a French archaeologist of distinction, and
published by him in 1847.[5] The exact place of its discovery is
unknown.  M.  Prisse is said to have bought it of one of the _fellahîn_
whom he employed to make excavations at the burial-ground of Thebes.
This man pretended that he had no knowledge of its finding, as he was
trying to sell it for a friend.  It is believed that it was actually
taken by the Arab from the tomb of one of the Kings 'Entef;[6] but this
is not certain.  If it were, it would perhaps enable us to fix a
_terminus ad que,_ for the writing of this copy, although tombs often
contain objects of later date.  The papyrus was presented in about
1847, by M. Prisse, to the {23} Bibliotheque Nationale (in those days
the Bibliotheque Royale) at Paris, where it still is, divided and
glazed in the usual manner.

Spread out flat, it measures about 23 ft. 7 in., with an average height
of 5 7/8 in., which is about the usual height of papyri of the Eleventh
and Twelfth Dynasties.  It contains at present eighteen pages of heavy
and bold black and red writing, in the so-called hieratic character.
At first sight it appears to be in perfect preservation, being entirely
free from the cracks and decay which mar many fine manuscripts of far
later date; but an examination of the contents shows that an unknown
quantity has been torn off from the commencement.  Originally the roll
contained at least two books, of which we have the latter part of one
and the whole of the other.  Between these there is a blank space of
some 53 in.

The characters are clearly and carefully made, but are not always
correct, as though the copyist had a badly written or very cursive copy
before him, and was not always sure of his spelling.

The first of these books, of which only the last two pages remain to
us, is a treatise on deportment, and is here called the _Instruction of
Ke'gemni_.  It has always been attributed to this person since its
discovery, but examination of as much of the book as exists will show
that it is not said to have been written by him.  Because {24} his is
the only name mentioned, Egyptologists have concluded that he is the
author.  The unnamed Vizier, who called his children to him, can hardly
be Ke'gemni, who was not raised to the rank of Vizier and Governor of a
city until afterwards.  Ke'gemni may well have been a son of the
author.  This is not of material importance, however, as the date of
writing is given as the end of the reign of Heuni, the last King of the
Third Dynasty, who died about 3998 B.C.  This book, then, which argues
a society of some refinement, is, so far as it goes, the oldest in the
world.

After a long stretch of blank papyrus, from which a third book has
perhaps been erased, we come upon the _Instruction of Ptah-hotep_ in
its entirety, divided into sections by red writing, as aforesaid.[7]
In this, also, we get a definite date, for we learn in the opening
lines that its author (or compiler) lived in the reign of King Isôsi.
Now Isôsi was the last ruler but one of the Fifth Dynasty, and ruled
forty-four years, from about 3580 to 3536 B.C.  Thus we may take about
3550 as the period of Ptah-hotep.

Of these two kings there is hardly anything to say.  Heuni is only
known to us by mention of his name; we have no record of any act of
his.  {25} Of Isôsi the only exploit that remains is this: that he sent
his Treasurer, Be'wêrded, to Somaliland[8] to obtain for him a certain
kind of dwarf; this the Treasurer brought back, and received much
reward therefor.  That is all that is left of the reigns of two kings,
who ruled long, who perhaps ruled greatly and wisely, having just cause
to hope that their fame and the report of their good deeds might never
pass away.  Such is the fate of kings.

The copy of these Instructions that we have, the only complete copy,[9]
is far later than the later of these dates.  An examination of the
writing shows that it is not earlier than the Eleventh Dynasty, and is
probably of the Twelfth.[10] More than this cannot be said; where it
was written, by whom, and when, are not stated, as they are in many
cases.  The writing lacks the fine regularity of that of the
professional scribes of the Twelfth Dynasty, and has many points of
divergence therefrom; but the papyrus is assigned by the best judges to
this period.  This gives it an antiquity of about four thousand five
hundred years; and it looks good to last as long again, if only it be
not examined over-much nor brought out into the light too often.  {26}
It is as fresh and readable as in the year after it was written.  Will
the books of our time last one-tenth so long?  It is not without a
feeling of awe, even of sadness, that one with any sense of the wonder
of things gazes for the first time on the old book, and thinks of all
it has survived.  So many empires have arisen and gone down since those
words were penned, so many great and terrible things have been.


And we are fortunate indeed in having such a book as this of Ptah-hotep
for the most ancient complete literary work extant.  For not by any
magical texts, or hymns and prayers, should we be so well shown the
conditions of that early time; but our moralist, by advancing counsels
of perfection for every contingency, has left us a faithful record of
his age.  The veil of five-and-a-half thousand years is rent, and we
are met with a vivid and a fascinating picture of the domestic and
social life of the 'Old Kingdom.'  We read of the wife, who must be
treated kindly at all costs; the genial generosity of the rich man, and
the scowling boor, a thorn in the side of his friends and relations,
the laughing-stock of all men; the unquenchable talkers of every
station in life, who argue high, who argue low, who also argue round
about them, as common as now in the East, and the trusted councillor,
weighing every word; the obstinate _ignoramus_ who sees {27} everything
inverted, listening open-mouthed to the disjointed gossip of those near
him, and the scholar, conversing freely with learned and unlearned
alike, recognising that, measured against the infinite possibilities of
knowledge and skill, we are all much of the same stature; the master of
the estate or province, treated with infinite respect by his
subordinates in rank and wealth, and the paid servants that are never
satisfied, who leave after presents have been made them; the
hard-working clerk who casts accounts all day, and the tradesmen who
will perhaps give you credit when money is dear, if you have previously
made friends of them; the well-bred diner-out, lightly passing on his
favourite dish, contenting himself with plain fare, and the _gourmand_
who visits his friends at meal-times, departing only when the larder is
entirely exhausted.

Not only do we find such characters as these in Ptah-hotep's hand-book,
but interesting scenes are brought near to us by the writing-reed of
that primaeval Chesterfield.  We find ourselves taking supper at the
table of a great man.  His subordinates sit round, scarcely daring to
raise their eyes from their food, not speaking to their host until
spoken to.  He serves the food that is before him according to his
liking for each guest; and the less favoured find solace in the
reflection that even the distribution of food is {28} according to
Providence.  We pass on.  Now we are in the hall of council with the
other overseers and officials of the province, and our overlord
presiding.  We notice with astonishment the extreme solemnity and
strict observance of custom and precedence in this archaic period.
Many of those who have met report on the matters under their charge,
and others debate on them.  The one now speaking is discussing a trade
about which he knows nothing, and an expert rises and makes very short
work of his opponent's arguments.  Now we are among some people
dividing up property.  One of them has tried, of course, to bully his
friends into giving him more than his due share, and, having failed,
leaves the house in a rage.  He will regret it later.  And so on.


Nothing definite is known concerning these two nobles beyond what is
said of them in their works.  A fine tomb of a certain Ke'gemni exists
at Memphis; his titles, so far as can be ascertained,[11] are: _Judge
of the High Court: Governor of the Land unto its Limit, South and
North: Director of every Command_.  He has sometimes been supposed to
be identical with our Ke'gemni; {29} but I am assured by those most
competent to judge that this tomb cannot be earlier than the Fifth
Dynasty (a good three hundred years from the date assigned to the
moralist), so that the theory that they are one person may be dismissed
as highly improbable.  No other person of the name is known.

The position is much the same with Ptah-hotep.  There are near Memphis
the tombs of several nobles of this name, of whom two lived in the
reign of Isôsi; and in this case, again, it has been assumed that
one[12] of these two must be the writer of the Instruction.  But in
neither instance do the titles coincide with or include those assigned
to him.  The highest title which he bears, _Eldest Son of the King_,
does not anywhere appear in these tombs.  It is true that one of these
contemporaries was _Hereditary Chief_; but we know that Ptah-hotep was
a common name at this time, and in the absence of more certain proof it
will be well to abstain from the identification of like names upon
insufficient grounds.  Thus it is only by the chance discovery of this
{30} scroll that these two princes of old time, whose bodies are blown
about the desert dust these many centuries, are secured from utter
oblivion; men '_such as did bear rule in their kingdoms, men renowned
for their power, giving counsel by their understanding, and declaring
prophecies: Leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their
knowledge of learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent in their
instructions_.'  And against such as these, that from remote years
'_have left a name behind them, that their praises might be reported,_'
how many are there '_which have no memorial; who are perished, as
though they had never been; and are become as though they had never
been born; and their children after them_.'[13]


I had intended to make a detailed analysis of the moral sense of
Ptah-hotep and Ke'gemni, but it appears unnecessary; since they give
their advice so clearly and simply, they may safely be left to speak
for themselves.  But as especially noteworthy I would point to the
gracious tolerance of ignorance enjoined in § 1 (Ptah-hotep), and the
fine reason given for that injunction, in contrast with the scorn
expressed for the obstinate fool (Ph. 40); the care due to a wife (Ph.
21), which is in signal contrast to the custom of other Eastern nations
in this {31} respect;[14] the great stress laid on filial duties (Ph.
38, 39, 41, 42, 43); the enthusiasm for obedience, expressed in a
jargon of puns (Ph. 38), which, once the high-watermark of style among
Egyptian _literati_, has long since lost its savour; the interesting
matter on manners at table (Kg. 2, 3, Ph. 7, 9), in society (Kg. 4, Ph.
14, 18, 20, 34), and in official positions (Ph. 5, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17,
24, 28).  A rough classification including many sections is here given:

Duties toward superiors (Ph. 2, 7, 8, 10, 16, 27, 31).

Duties toward equals (3, 6, 14, 18, 20, 26, 29, 33, 35, 37).

Duties toward inferiors (1, 4, 5, 16, 17, 22).  The whole teaching
resolves into the maxim, "Be good, and you will be happy;" not at all
in the sense that virtue is its own reward--I do not think that that
would have seemed an adequate return to Ptah-hotep--but in the sense of
material welfare rewarding, as a matter of course, an honourable life.
Following his reasoning, if a man be obedient as a son, punctilious as
a servant, generous and gentle as a master, and courteous as a friend,
then all good things shall fall to him, he shall reach a green old age
honoured by the King, and his memory shall be long in the land.  This
theory, which is not {32} found satisfactory in our day, is insisted on
by most of the ancient moralists, who appear to regard it, not as a
substitute for conscience, but rather as a _raison d'être_ or
justification thereof.  Yet, centuries before a King of Israel had seen
all things that are, and found them vanity, a King of Egypt had left it
on record that he had done all good things for his subjects, and that
'there was no satisfaction therein.'


It has been said with some truth of codes of morals and laws that what
is omitted is almost as important as what is included.  But we must not
carry this too far; we should be foolish indeed did we assert that
those things omitted from such a code as Ptah-hotep's were not
practised or not held to be important in his day.  For example, he
'knows nothing'--as a Higher Critic would say--of kindness to animals;
but we know from many things that the Egyptians treated animals kindly
and made much of them as pets.  In the very tomb of that Ptah-hotep
mentioned above,[15] who may be our author, is depicted the bringing of
three dogs and a tame monkey to him while he is dressing; possibly so
that he may feed them himself.  And this kindly feeling obtained
throughout Egyptian history.  They treated animals more as 'dumb
friends' in those days than might have been {33} _a priori_ expected,
and more, perhaps, than any other nation of antiquity.  Again, he
'knows nothing' of duties to the mother, although he is so insistent on
duties to the father; but the high position of women and their
matriarchal privileges oppose any deduction that Egyptian manners were
somewhat to seek in this direction.  Ke'gemni says of the unsociable
man that he is a grief to his mother, and another moralist of uncertain
date (perhaps Twelfth Dynasty, about B.C. 2700), named 'Eney, is
explicit on this matter.  He says to his son, '_I gave thee thy mother,
she that bore thee with much suffering....  She placed thee at the
Chamber of Instruction for the sake of thine instruction in books; she
was constant to thee daily, having loaves and beer in her house.  When
thou art grown, and hast taken to thee a wife, being master in thy
house, cast thine eyes on the one that gave thee birth and provided
thee with all good things, as did thy mother.  Let her not reproach
thee, lest she lift up her hands to the God, and He hear her prayer._'

And, most remarkable of all omissions, there is nothing said as to
duties to the Gods.  In Egypt, whose Gods are beyond counting, where
almost everybody was a priest, Ptah-hotep--himself a 'Holy Father' and
'Beloved of the God'--has no word to say on religious obligations,
devoting his work entirely to the principles of charity and duty to
one's neighbour.  It is {34} seemingly sufficient to him that one do
the right in this world, without thinking overmuch about the other.
This is the more curious in that other writers of the same class have
many injunctions regarding worship and sacrifice; and so complete is
his reserve touching this matter, so important in the eyes of other
Egyptians, that it is easy to believe that it was intentional.  We may
even discern in him a protagonist of the modern 'Ethical School,' whose
adherents may be interested to find their views implicitly held so long
ago.
