It is possible to add, now, while this paper is passing through the
press (June 1919), the results of a back-cross of 4 F₁ females to a
Sebright male carried out during the summer of 1918. The birds being now
mature their permanent colors are evident. Making the back-cross in this
direction is much less advantageous than the reciprocal described above,
because the Sebright contains most of the dominant color factors. The
group of birds obtained appeared to be less variable in color than those
from the other back-cross, and one can see at a glance that more of them
approach the Sebright type; some quite closely.

All of the males are hen-feathered, as expected. No evidence was found
that two types of males exist, which would have been expected if the two
types noted in F₂ had any hereditary significance. If, then, as the F₂
results suggest, two factors for hen-feathering are present both are
dominant, and no genetic distinction is found between individuals in
which one or both of the dominant factors are duplex or simplex.

There were 9 adult hens and 10 hen-feathered cocks. An attempt is made
below to refer them to their corresponding F₂ classes.


F. REVIEW OF THE HEREDITY OF THE COLOR OF THE PLUMAGE OF POULTRY.

In poultry there are perhaps more different colors and color-patterns
than in any other species of domesticated animals. The genetic work has
advanced far enough to show that many of the differences depend on
Mendelian factors. It is probable that, in addition to the main factors,
there are many contributory, minor, or modifying factors that give the
finer details to “show birds.”

It is generally supposed that the wild bird from which some at least of
the domesticated races have come is _Gallus bankiva_ of India and
Indo-China, or else one or another of its subspecies. In any case, the
wild type of coloration is approximately known, since the known wild
races are colored alike in all essential respects. Even were the color
of the wild type not known, the original plumage could be deduced with
some degree of probability from the atavism that appears when some of
the races are hybridized. It is interesting to find that many of the new
plumage characters are dominant to the wild type. The same relation also
holds rather generally for other characters of poultry, such as the
comb, etc.

Amongst the uniform or single-colored races, the whites, blacks, reds,
and buffs have been studied. Bateson and Punnett were the first to show
that the white of the White Leghorn is dominant. They also showed that
the white of the White Rose Comb bantams is recessive. Another white,
that of the White Silky, is also recessive, but due to a different
factor from the white factor of the Rose Comb bantams; for, when these
two whites are bred together they give colored birds in the first
generation. Hurst showed later that the white of the Leghorn is dominant
over the black of the Hamburg and the buff of the Cochin. The dominance
is often not complete, since tints of black or of buff or even patches
of these colors may occur. The latter may be confined to the head, neck,
and breast. The black plumage of the Hamburg is dominant over the buff
of the Cochins, but incompletely so, as the black background may be
marked and shaded with brown. Whether we are dealing here with one pair
of factors, or two pairs, could only be determined by an F₂ ratio;
whether it is 3:1 or 9:3:3:1.

The blue color of the Andalusian is known not to be a simple color, but
to be a fine mosaic of splashed white and black. The color is produced
in birds that are heterozygous for splashed white and black, or at least
for certain kinds of white and black. This relation was first
demonstrated by Bateson and Punnett (1902 and 1905) and later Saunders
(1906). It appears also from certain crosses made by Davenport that some
of the whites (such as that of the Leghorn) and black (such as that of
the Minorca) may at times also give some blue birds when crossed.
Whether there are also other races with dominant white color different
from that of the Andalusian white (and the same holds for black races
also) or whether a special (recessive) white was present in this cross
when the blue appeared, was not made out by Davenport.

Lippincott has recently studied the Andalusian cross and obtained
essentially the same results as his predecessors. He calls attention to
an interesting fact in the splashed whites, namely, that the color
splashes are blue when they are found in those parts of the body where
the color is blue in the Andalusian. Although the Andalusian is always
spoken of as a blue bird, the hen only is entirely blue, while the male
is black above and blue below. The splashes on a white male correspond
to the black and blue of the Andalusian male, and are black if above and
blue if below.

Lippincott found also that the blue birds differ from the black in two
characteristics, viz, in the blues the pigment is in larger masses, _i.
e._, it is more clumped, leaving more white between the clumps than in
the blacks, and in the blues the pigment is absent in the extremities of
the barbules. If the clumping and the condition of the barbules are
treated as separate entities, each gives a 3:1 ratio. Lippincott
concludes, therefore, that the Andalusian cross is a 2-factor case. If
each of these characteristics was independent of the other in the sense
that some birds had clumped pigment and others deficiencies in the
barbules, then one might conclude that he was dealing with a 2-factor
case; but if these two characters are only different aspects of the same
gene, and when one is present the other is also, the situation is not
different from those that are very common, viz, two or more effects
produced by the same genetic factor.

Davenport has recorded results of crossing several breeds of different
colors (1906 and 1909). The white of the Leghorn was found dominant to
the black of the Minorca breed, although the hybrids, “at least the
females,” had some black feathers. This white was also found to be
dominant to the mottled Houdan and to the “Red-backed game.” On the
other hand, a male Tosa with wild-type plumage by recessive White Cochin
female gave “barred” males in F₁; the barring coming in, no doubt, from
the Cochin and although not at the time recognized by Davenport as
sex-linked inheritance, the statement that barring is “associated with
maleness” (as already pointed out by Darwin) indicated that the barring
that appeared within the cross was probably the sex-linked barring shown
by other breeds.

In Davenport’s cross of White Leghorn by Minorca two blues appeared (as
stated above), indicating that the same factors were here present that
in the Andalusian white and black strain gives the same result,[3] but
why only some of the F₁ appear as blue, while others are not blue, is
not yet made clear, unless two factors for white were present. White of
the Leghorn breed was found not to be as completely dominant over buff
as over black. Black was found dominant over the wild-type
(Black-Breasted game), but red is present in F₁ birds also to some
extent in those places where red is found in the game. Lacing, as shown
by the Dark Brahma, is dominant to the plumage of the Tosa. Penciling
also is said to be dominant, as shown in females of the cross between
the Dark Brahma and Tosa fowl.

In his later paper (1909) Davenport gives fuller information in regard
to some of the F₁ cases reported in his first paper, as well as the F₂
results. Thus, in the cross of Silky to Minorca, that gives black F₁
birds, the F₂ count gave 210 black, 57 game, and 95 white--approximately
the expectation for two pairs of factors, one of them giving white
(9:3:4). Silky by White Leghorn gave white F₁’s, but the males developed
red on the wing bow and saddle when they became mature, and the female a
faint blush of salmon (“red”) on the breast. In F₂ there were whites,
games, and blacks, approximating to expectation for three pairs of
factors, one being a dominant white (52:9:3). Silky by Buff Cochin gave
a washed-out buff, but with the jungle coloration partly developed in
the tail (black) and hackles and wing bow (redder buff). Davenport
represents the Buff Cochin as having lost the jungle patterns and
coloration, while the Silky retains it. The heterozygous condition of
the genes for the wild-type color in F₁ is made responsible for the part
development of color. The White Silky is represented as carrying the
factor for black (N), hence in F₂ both black and game-colored birds are
expected and they were obtained. When Black Cochin is crossed to Buff
Cochin, the F₁ males are in general like the game (black and red) while
the females are black (except for some red on the hackle). In this case
Davenport represents the Black Cochin as showing a factor for
jungle-fowl pattern, but lacking the color that is assumed in his other
formulæ to go with this pattern. What is meant by this change is not
quite clear to me, unless Davenport supposes there is an independent
factor for the jungle-fowl pattern which may be filled in by other
colors determined by other factors. But were there enough F₁ birds to
exclude the possibility that jungle-fowl birds would not appear in this
cross?

Davenport has reported a cross between a female White Cochin and a male
Tosa (wild type) from which the daughters were Tosa, except that the
shafting was broadened, and the saddle feathers and proximal secondaries
were obscurely barred (black and buff); the sons were also like the
Tosa, but every feather was repeatedly barred (see above). In F₂ there
were 15 white, 25 game, and 16 barred birds. Davenport concludes that
“barring is clearly heterozygous and confined to the male sex,” and in a
footnote he adds that the sex-linked barring factor of the Plymouth Rock
is different from that of this Cochin-Tosa cross, but Goodale informs me
that the barring that appeared in this cross is probably the same as
that in Barred Rocks.

As pointed out, an interesting feature of color inheritance in poultry
is the large number of cases of sex-linked inheritance. It might seem
probable here, as in the case of _Drosophila_, that this is due to a
well-recognized difference between sex-linked and autosomal characters,
namely, that a recessive mutation in one of the sex chromosomes of a
sperm-cell of the male bird will have a chance of showing its effect
immediately if that sperm-cell unites with an egg without a Z to form a
daughter, whereas it would not immediately show up in the offspring if
the mutation were autosomal.[4] In consequence the recessive mutant
would have a greater chance of being observed and selected if it
appeared in a sex chromosome. But dominant sex-linked characters,
however, have the same chance as dominant autosomal ones and the
question turns therefore on the kinds of characters shown in the cross.

The first indication of sex-linkage in fowls was furnished by evidence
that Spillman published in 1903 on information supplied by
poultry-men--information that has been proven subsequently to have been
accurate. Spillman pointed out clearly the similarity between the facts
he quoted and the then known cases of sex-linkage in the canary and in
the currant moth. The case referred to by Spillman was a cross between
Barred Plymouth Rock and Black Langshan. Goodale and I repeated the
cross, using both Plymouth Rock and American Dominques, publishing the
results in 1912. In addition to the F₁ results evidence was obtained for
the F₂ generation. The theory was also tested by back-crossing. The
results of such a cross that are typical for all cases of the sort are
briefly as follows: Plymouth Rock cock by Langshan hen gives F₁ barred
sons and barred daughters. These inbred give F₂ barred cocks and barred
and black hens (2:1:1).

In the following schemes the sex chromosomes are represented by Z and W,
while the exponents stand for the factors involved, viz, B for barred
and b for not-barred, which here means a black bird.

Before these experiments were finished Goodale had made other crosses
involving the barring factor, and had obtained results that showed the
sex-linked inheritance of this factor (1909). For example, he crossed
Buff Rock male (not barred) to white Plymouth Rock females. The sons
were barred and the daughters not barred. The reciprocal cross gave
barred sons and daughters. A White Rock male (carrying barring) mated to
a Brown Leghorn female gave barred sons and daughters. Reciprocally, the
chicks were of two kinds as to their down, viz, black chicks and chicks
with the down pattern of the barred rock. All these results with Barred
Plymouth Rocks show that they carry a sex-linked dominant factor for
barring. Its wild-type allelomorph would be game-color (jungle-fowl),
but since, when the dominant barring is absent in some of the
individuals in these crosses, they are black, it would seem to follow
that another dominant factor, one for black, that is not sex-linked, is
also present.

Pearl and Surface have also carried out crosses with Plymouth Rocks on a
much larger scale. Their results conformed in every way to the
foregoing. They crossed Barred Plymouth Rocks and Cornish Indian games.
The plumage of the male of the latter race is black with dark red on the
back and wing-bows; the females are also black laced with mahogany
ground-color on back, breast, wing, and tail coverts. When the male game
is mated to the barred hen the sons are barred and the daughters are
black. In the reciprocal cross both sons and daughters are barred. The
back-cross tests conformed to expectation. The results were the same as
those already stated above for the Langshan-Rock cross.

Sturtevant crossed Columbian Wyandottes and Brown Leghorns. The F₁ sons
were alike, whichever way the cross was made. They were fairly typical
Wyandottes, which race carries therefore more of the dominant plumage
characters (two or three?). There were two types of daughters, depending
on the direction in which the cross was made. When the father is
Wyandotte, the daughters are like him (except for stippling of the
Leghorn type). When the father is Brown Leghorn the daughters are
somewhat stippled red birds. In the former case the daughters getting
their Z chromosome from their Wyandotte father resemble him; in the
latter case the daughters getting their Z chromosome from their Leghorn
father look more like him. Their failure to look exactly like him must
be due to autosomal factors derived from the Wyandotte mother that
dominate other autosomal factors from the father.

Hagedoorn crossed Black Breasted Game bantams (like those used in my
Sebright crosses) to Brown-Breasted bantams. In the latter the black
breast feathers of the male are bordered by lemon; the hens are nearly
black. Black-breasted male to “brown-red” female gave both
black-breasted sons and daughters. In the reciprocal cross all the sons
were black-breasted (like the mother) and all the daughters were brown
red like the father. Evidently the factor here for Brown Breasted game
is sex-linked and recessive. In this case the new mutant sex-linked
character is recessive to the wild type.

Davenport (1912) crossed Brown Leghorns to Dark Brahmas. In the cross
and its reciprocal all the sons are alike. Two dominant sex-linked
factors were found,[5] viz, the white background characteristic of the
Dark Brahmas and the red upper wing-coverts (and back) characteristic of
the Brown Leghorns. On the other hand, the _daughters_ differ in the two
crosses, in each case resembling their father in their hackle color.

When two sex-linked characters are involved in a cross it is possible to
determine by suitable matings whether an interchange between the
chromosomes that bear them has taken place. In the case of the sex
chromosomes only one sex, the male, has both like chromosomes, viz, ZZ,
and we expect from analogy with the _Drosophila_ work that crossing-over
would be found between the sex chromosomes only in the male. Goodale has
recently (1917) made the important discovery that in poultry
crossing-over takes place between the sex chromosomes (ZZ) in the male,
but not in the female (ZW or ZO). This relation, therefore, is the
reverse in birds and flies, for, in the one, crossing-over takes place
in the female and in the other in the male. Whether this difference
extends also to the other chromosomes in birds as it does in flies is as
yet not known.

Several years ago some crosses between gold and silver Campines were
reported by Rev. E. Lewis Jones. The results are consistent with the
view that a sex-linked factor pair is responsible for this difference in
color, although the author does not apply this view to his results. The
results may be seen in the table on page 16, to which Jones has
prefixed the number of individuals. The cross also involved
hen-feathering _versus_ cock-feathering, which appears here (as in other
cases) to be a non-sex-linked dominant factor. As stated above there are
in the results a few apparent inconsistencies with this interpretation,
due possibly to heterozygous females having been used in the crosses.

Lefevre crossed Silver Spangled Hamburgs and Brown Leghorns. The
spangling was found to be a sex-linked dominant factor. A spangled cock
bred to a Leghorn hen gives spangled sons and daughters; a spangled hen
by a Leghorn male gave spangled sons and not spangled daughters. The
daughters do not transmit spangling. Other factors may obscure the
results, especially factors for black, or the localization of the
pattern. Lefevre says “it would seem probable that multiple factors for
black, introduced by the Brown Leghorns, are present, and that these
factors may have a cumulative effect, with the result that pigmentation
is developed to varying degrees of extension.” Whether the factors for
black spoken of as coming from the Leghorns are dominant wild-type
factors that have mutant allelomorphs in the Silver Spangled Hamburg is
not entirely clear from the quotation.

Baur gives in his Introduction to the Study of Heredity (1914, pp.
202-203) some results (unpublished) that Hagedoorn had obtained by
crossing gold and silver races of Assendelver birds. The factor is
sex-linked and is no doubt the same factor reported by Jones for gold
and silver Campines and by Sturtevant for Columbian Wyandottes. Silver
dominates gold and the sex relations are the same as those already
reported by others for poultry, viz, the male is ZZ, the female ZW. Gold
hens by a heterozygous silver[6] gave 162 silver cocks, 163 silver hens,
168 gold cocks, 160 gold hens, expressed graphically (_g_ for gold, _s_
for silver):

Whether the recessive white that is sometimes found in dominant White
Rock stock is different from both of the other recessive whites is not
known. There are, then, 5 or 6 recessive characters that are not
sex-linked and 1 recessive sex-linked character.

Owing to the relatively large number of color dominants in poultry, some
unnecessary confusion has arisen concerning the relation of the
dominants to the wild type, and especially to other mutant characters to
which they are said to be dominant, in the sense, however, of being
epistatic. An imaginary example will illustrate this. For example, if at
some locus in the wild type a mutation occurred that gave a dominant
black (_i. e._, a black that shows up when one gene for it is present)
and at the same time this black also showed up even when other recessive
mutant characters were present in homozygous form, then F₁ birds would
be black when black is crossed to such pure recessive stocks. Such cases
have indeed been described as dominant, but a knowledge of F₂ would have
shown at once the error of such a system. For, if black had been a real
dominant, the F₂ would have given 3 blacks to 1 of the other type (such
as the wild type), but if the case were one of epistasis, then there
would have been 9:3:3:1 classes in F₂ (or some modification of that
ratio). In this sense, then, epistasis may be defined as a result that
appears when one member of the pair of genes produces its effect
regardless of the constitution of the individual with respect to another
gene (or other pairs of genes). It is curious at least to note that in
the case of dominant white the term epistatic has been much less often
used than in the case of black. Theoretically the two situations are
exactly alike, but because black could so obviously conceal things
beneath it, while white is not thought of as doing so, it seemed
“natural” to make such a distinction. In reality it is not a question of
covering up at all, but a case of a dominant character (white or black)
preventing other colors from appearing.

In the case of recessive white the situation is somewhat different and
no one, so far as I know, has gone so far as to speak of such a white as
epistatic, although when the animal is white it certainly hides, when
completely effective, all the other effects of color-producing factors,
but allows them to “show through” in some of the cases. This means not
that they do “show through,” but that they only develop to a “lower”
degree. The difference between dominant and recessive whites rests on
the fact that in one case one member of a pair of factors gives white
and in the other both members are necessary. But obviously such a
distinction is not important, and if it were worth while the case might
be argued for recessive whites being also epistatic. The whole tangle
goes back to a false interpretation of presence and absence of
characters and presence and absence of factors. As I have gone over this
ground recently in my paper on the Theory of the Gene, I need not repeat
here what I tried to make clear there.
The occurrence of gland-like cells with an internal secretion in the
ovary and testes of fowls has been described by a number of writers and
denied, at least for the testes, by others. The work of Boring and Pearl
has done much to bring this question to a satisfactory solution, for
they have tested out and made use of the best reagents that their
predecessors had discovered and have used a much greater amount of
material. As they have reviewed very fully the literature of the
subject, it will not be necessary to go over the ground again in detail.

In the follicles of the ovary there are present, according to Boring and
Pearl, groups or nests of cells lying among the connective tissue of the
inner theca. The cells are about three times as large as the ordinary
connective-tissue cells of the ovary. The cytoplasm is clear and
vacuolated, “only occasionally containing a few acidophile granules
which stain with the fuchsin in Mallory’s stain or the eosin of Mann’s
stain, while the real interstitial cells are crowded with granules.”

When the egg is set free from its follicle, the latter collapses and the
rupture becomes closed. A mass of cells collects in the center of the
collapsed structure which develop yellow pigment. The cells, lying in
the puckered edge of the follicle, may also develop such yellow color.
The cells that produce the yellow pigment come from the nests of cells
that lay originally mainly in the theca interna. Either by migration or
by division they come to fill up the central cavity. The yellow
substance in the cells is not fat, since it does not dissolve in the
clearing oils, nor can it be protein, for it does not take acid stains
as normal secretion granules of protein. It does not dissolve in HCl,
HNO₃, or H₂SO₄, nor in strong KOH, although the latter turns the pigment
a bright red color. Many other substances were also tried by Boring and
Pearl, but none of them dissolved the yellow pigment, which reacts in
this respect in the same way as does the yellow pigment in the luteal
cells of the mammal. The similarity in the nature of the pigments in the
two cases is an argument in favor of the view that the cells that
produce the pigment are the same in both groups. In the mammal the
yellow corpus luteum is a large, gland-like organ that develops after
the ovum is discharged; in the bird there is also a yellow spot on the
ovary, due to the pigment in the collapsed follicle, but it is smaller
and much less conspicuous than in the mammal. The evidence concerning
luteal cells in the testes of the bird is conflicting. One of the
difficulties in the situation is the identification of the cells, which
are sometimes regarded merely as the general connective-tissue stroma of
the testis that is undoubtedly present; at other times special secretory
cells are discerned embedded in the connective tissue, as individual
cells or in islands. Boring states (1912) that in newly hatched chicks
about half of the tissue of the testes is interstitial connective
tissue; the other half consists of tubes or cords whose principal
function is the development of the germ-cells. In the paper of 1912
Boring reached the conclusion that there are no “interstitial cells in
the testes of the domesticated chicken in the sense that this term has
been previously used,” and states that no evidence has been found that
an internal secretion of any kind is formed by any cells of the
interstitial tissue.

It is not necessary to discuss whether or not connective-tissue cells
are present in the testes of birds, for is it generally conceded that
they are found at least in certain stages, but it is important to look
into the question as to whether among these interstitial cells there are
others that have an endocrine function. Mazzetti gives pictures of such
gland-cells between the seminal tubules of the cock bird, but says that
they are rare, “even though this bird has very marked secondary sexual
characters” (Boring and Pearl). It may be remarked parenthetically that
if they had been more abundant the bird might have had no secondary
sexual plumage since it will be pointed out below that such glandular
cells may have as their special function the suppression of these
characters.

According to Des Cilleuls, interstitial cells are first found in males
about 30 days old and at this time the secondary sexual characters put
in their appearance. If, as will be shown in the sequel, he means by
interstitial cells the endocrine cells that suppress the development of
the male plumage in the female, the appearance of these cells at this
time would be significant; but if he implies that their occurrence in
the male incites the development of the secondary sexual characters, his
interpretation is open to serious doubt. Reeves found interstitial cells
in testes of cocks 3, 5½, 9, and 18 months--more in the earlier stages.

In a later communication by Boring and Pearl the whole question is taken
up again with improved methods, etc. Previously 21 male birds had been
studied, just hatched to 12 months old. More sections of this same
material were made which were stained according to Mann’s and Mallory’s
methods. In addition, a whole new series of preparations was made. A few
interstitial cells, i. e., granule containing-cells were found in newly
hatched chicks, but not in any of the 60 mature birds examined.




LUTEAL-CELLS IN THE TESTES OF THE MALE SEBRIGHT.


Finding that the testes of F₂ hen-feathered birds were often flat and
pear-shaped instead of rounded and cylindrical, as in ordinary cocks,
and that they were often black in color, suggested, as already stated,
that the testes of the Sebright might be hermaphrodite in some element.
It seemed not impossible that egg-cells might be found. I made a
considerable number of sections of the testes of these birds and
examined them under the microscope; not finding any egg or egg-like
bodies, the slides were laid aside, but the idea that in some other way
the Sebright’s testes might correspond to the ovary of the female next
recurred to my mind. Consequently, when in the summer of 1918 I had some
new material derived from a castrated Sebright male that had partly
regenerated its testes and was again going back to hen-feathering, and
pieces from one of the old testes of a castrated bird, I asked Miss
Boring, who was then in Woods Hole, to make some preparations and
examine them to see if she could detect any such elements in them as she
had found in the female. Miss Boring reported the occurrence of luteal
cells in the testes from hen-feathered males, and the results have been
published in a brief preliminary paper (1918). The abundance of these
clear cells, supposedly gland-cells with endocrine influences, in the
testes of hen-feathered birds is in sharp contrast to their absence in
the normal adult cock birds. It seems to follow, therefore, that the
hen-feathering in the Sebrights is due to the presence of these cells,
whose function is the same as of the similar cells in the female, _i.
e._, the suppression in both of cock-feathering. Castrating the Sebright
produces its effect by the removal of these cells that are responsible
for the suppression of cock-feathering.

The occurrence of luteal cells in young stages of other races of poultry
raises the question as to whether in these races the first or juvenile
plumage, that resembles that of the hen rather than that of the cock,
may not also be due to an internal secretion from these cells, or
whether this juvenile plumage is only the plumage of a characteristic
stage in development. Castration of young chicks ought to settle this
point. Such castration experiments have been made by Goodale. The
absence of any reference to any effect on the juvenile plumage in these
early castrated birds probably meant that they did not develop
precociously cock-feathering, and he writes me that he examined them
carefully and that their plumage is like that of the normal chicks.
Geoffrey Smith has reported the occurrence of two kinds of males in a
race of Leghorns, the males of one of which become cock-feathered before
the other. May not this difference depend on the length of time
endocrine cells remain or begin to develop? A histological study of the
two types would be of the greatest interest.




ENDOCRINE CELLS IN THE TESTES OF MAMMALS.


In man and other mammals it has long been recognized that in addition to
the germinal cells of the testis there are also present other cells,
sometimes called interstitial cells, that, so far as known, have no
immediate function in connection with the germ-cells, or at least that
have other important functions outside the relation to the reproductive
organ. That some internal secretion from these cells has an important
influence on the secondary sexual characters rather than anything done
by or produced by the germinal cells has been very clearly shown by
evidence derived from three separate sources, namely, from the operation
known as vasectomy, from an exceptional condition known as
cryptorchidism, and more indirectly from X-ray treatment. Vasectomy
involves either cutting the vasa deferentia in such a way that the cut
ends do not reunite. In consequence of the closure of the outlet of the
testis the germinal cells slowly degenerate, and finally completely
disappear. How such an effect is produced we do not know. That this
result does take place is borne out by the unanimous testimony of all
those who have successfully performed the operation. Ancel and Bouin
showed (1903) that breaking the continuity of the vas deferens
suppressed spermatogenesis in 8 to 12 months. Both the Sertoli cells
(the nourishing cells of the germinal epithelium) and the interstitial
cells persist. Such animals remain sexually active and their secondary
sexual characters are not affected. Marshall states that in the hedgehog
the remarkable periodic enlargement of the testis takes place even after
vasectomy, although the germ-cells have disappeared.

