[[Jean Paul Marat, William Skeen],
[[Judging the Use of Cassia had been continued long enough, I advised
Marsh-mallows Suffumigations to be taken twice a Day, and a soft Pultis
of the _Quatre Farines_ to be applied to her Temples. These were used
for a whole Month, at the latter End of which the Scale was reduced to
Twenty-two Inches; that is, the Patient could tell the Hour by the same
Watch at Twenty-two Inches Distance. As her Humours appeared well diluted, in order to remove the Obstruction of the ocular Muscles, and promote the reducing of their Bulk, I desired to have some Sparks drawn from the Canthi of her Eyes, but was opposed
by her Mother, who having imbibed a strong Prejudice against such
Remedy, never would consent to it. Here I took Leave of my Patient. Ten Days after I was sent for by her Father, who, after a short Apology, told me, “if I was still of Opinion that Electrization would be of any
Service to his Daughter, my Advice should be followed.” I answered in
the Affirmative.
The next Morning a few Sparks were drawn accordingly. However, to
estimate the Effect of the electrical Fluid in this Case, I previously
repeated the Observation with the Watch, and found no Alteration in my
Patient’s Sight, since I had discontinued to attend her.
In the Evening a few Sparks likewise were drawn. The same was repeated
for many a Day, having Care, at every Time, to increase the Number of
Sparks.
She advanced but slowly towards her Recovery; for at the Beginning of
the fourth Week the Scale was reduced only to 18 Inches.
Astonished at so inconsiderable a Progress, I allowed some Intermission
to my Patient. During that Time, enquiring into what could have checked
the Efficacy of a Remedy I so much relied upon, I made the following
Reflection:--That since electrical Sparks acted only as stimulating,
they possibly could neither deobstruct nor reduce swelled Parts, as long as there was a Redundancy of Blood. To diminish its Mass, I therefore
had Recourse to Bleeding, and the next Day Electrization was re-assumed.
The Event justified my Expectation; for drawing Sparks had not been
continued eight Days, but the Scale was reduced to 13 Inches.
I had then a Mind to repeat Bleeding, but was obliged to postpone it, on Account of the Weakness of my Patient.],[Most of the early prints are certainly of an extremely rude type,
consisting chiefly of mere outlines of figures; in the one case of
saints, copied from the illuminated Missals, and in the other, of
characters for playing cards similar to the foregoing fac-simile,
afterwards coloured in imitation of paintings. Very probably they may
have been made, in the first instance, by means of stencil plates;
if not, the impressions were obtained from the engraved blocks by
friction, after the Chinese manner. Whichever was the method adopted,
the ‘Brief-malers’ or card painters of Germany seem to have run their
Italian brethren hard in the race of competition in the first half of
the Fifteenth century, as we learn from a decree of the Government of
Venice, bearing date the 11th October 1441; which, after stating that
the art and mystery of making cards and printed figures had fallen
into decay, from the numbers printed out of Venice, ordains--“That it
be ordered and established, according to that which certain masters
had supplicated, that from this time in future no work of the said art
that is printed or painted[24] on cloth or on paper, that is to say,
altar pieces, images, and playing cards, and whatever other work of the
said art is done with a brush and printed,[25] shall be allowed to be
brought or imported into this city under pain of forfeiting the works
so imported, and xxx livres and xii soldi,[26] of which fine one-third
shall go to the state, one-third to Signor Giustizieri Vecchi, to whom
the affair is committed, and one-third to the accuser.” The worthy
magistrates of Venice were excellent Protectionists in their day and
generation; but this antique method of printing, either from engraved
wooden blocks, or with stencilling plates and brushes, had soon to
give way to the newer art of Typography; and twenty-eight years after
the promulgation of this decree we find printed works issuing from the
press of John and Vandeline of Spire, established in Venice in the year
1469.
It is a moot point among antiquarians when playing cards were first
printed. The commonly received opinion of their invention in 1392 for
the amusement of the insane King, Charles VI of France, is decidedly
erroneous.[27] On this subject Mr. Planché writes,--“There is plenty
of evidence to prove that cards, drawn, painted, and gilded by the
hand, like those of Jacquemin-Gringonneur, and to which the name of
‘Tarot cards’ has been given, found their way into Europe from the East
in the Fourteenth century, or perhaps earlier; but they had nothing
in common with those to which we are accustomed, although they might
have suggested them, and the fact in no wise affects the question of
printing by means of wood-blocks only.”[28]]]]