Sandy Bay Colony lies on the Patagonian side of the Straits of
Magellan, on a level spot of ground which slopes down gently towards
the water on the south-east. The settlement had formerly been made
at Port Famine, at a short distance to the south-west of the present
colony; but that situation was found to be very bleak, the site of
the buildings being on a hill somewhat higher than the surrounding
country, and exposed to the sweep of the williwaws. The change had
been made under the direction of Don Benjamin Numoz Gamero, governor
of the colony, and the new site had been selected with great judgment.
The land proved very fertile, being well fitted to raise all the
crops which the short summers of that latitude will allow to come to
maturity; and the governor had cleared a good deal of ground around
the barracks, and laid out many gardens, which were cultivated by the
convicts. A street ran in front of the barracks, towards the water, and
on the slope of the shore were some very good houses. These houses were
made of boards that had been sawed from logs by the convicts. They used
hand-saws, and usually sawed about twelve or fourteen boards a day.

As I looked towards the shore from the vessel, as the sun went down,
on the evening of the 26th, there was all around the quiet and peace of
early summer, and the barracks shone out with the neatness that belongs
to all buildings for military purposes. How little did I guess the
violence and mutiny that were going on within!

There had been an insurrection in the colony about five days before,
headed by one Cambiaso, second lieutenant of the troops stationed
there; who, as I learned afterwards, had committed some offence and
been imprisoned a short time before by the order of the governor. At
his liberation, he had declared that he would have his revenge, and
I have some reason to suppose that he was instigated to seize the
place by some of the political offenders confined there, who were
adherents of General Cruz, and who still held some communication with
the revolutionists in the province of Conception. Cambiaso had been
joined by most of the convicts and prisoners. This attack on the troops
had been successful, but the governor, priest, some soldiers, and
one woman, a wife of one of the soldiers, had escaped outside of the
fort, and were then hiding in the woods. Cambiaso was in possession of
the fort when we anchored in the bay, but of this, of course, I knew
nothing.

Early in the evening, indeed as soon as it was dark, a boat put off
from shore and came alongside, with five men in her, bearing a letter
purporting to be from the governor of the colony, and signed Numoz
Gamero, desiring me to keep the prisoners on board until the next day,
when I should receive assistance from the shore, in landing them. I
showed the letter to captain Avalos, who, tired of his confinement on
ship board, determined to go on shore for the night, taking with him
some twelve prisoners in the boat which had been sent from the land,
and leaving the remainder of the prisoners and the troops under my
charge.

About twelve at night, I was aroused by the firing of cannon from the
shore, and I sprung upon deck, but I found all quiet in the vessel. In
a few moments, however, the watch gave the alarm that a boat was coming
near us, and crying for assistance. The wind blew so very fresh that it
was impossible to hear what was said from the boat, (the voices being
blown away from us,) but I conjectured that the prisoners who were
landed the evening before, and about whose security I had some doubts,
had made their escape from captain Avalos, and had probably stolen a
boat and were trying to get on board, where, with the assistance of the
other prisoners, they could seize the vessel and make their escape.
I immediately ordered a gun to be fired in answer to those from the
shore, to show that we were on the lookout, and then had the larboard
quarter boat lowered away and sent her out with five men, armed with
cutlasses, with orders to seize the shore boat.

After being gone for a whole hour, they returned, saying that they had
not been able to find her. Soon after, the noise of firing from the
shore ceased. In the boat were the governor, priest, some soldiers,
and a woman, who had escaped from the barracks, and, seizing a boat,
had put off, in hopes to reach me and warn me of the insurrection on
shore. Having but one oar, however, and the wind blowing very fresh,
they were unable to make the vessel, but drifted across the Straits and
attempted to land on the Terra del Fuego side.

As soon as captain Avalos reached the barracks, he was seized, his
papers taken from him, the prisoners who landed with him set at
liberty, and himself put into double irons and thrust into a calaboose,
as the buildings for confining the soldiers are called. During the
evening, he could hear the prisoners whom he had brought on shore, in
the full enjoyment of a drunken frolic. He told me afterwards that no
answer was made to his inquiries as to the reason of his seizure, but
that he obtained some idea of what was the real state of the colony,
by overhearing the conversation of the drunken prisoners. Late in the
evening, the door of the calaboose was opened, and five men, double
ironed, were thrust into the room. These, he found, were the Secretary
of the colony, a Brazilian by birth, the captain and first lieutenant
of the troops of the colony, the apothecary, and governor’s steward.

The escape of governor Gamero had been discovered by Cambiaso, and
these men were thrust into the calaboose with captain Avalos, a guard
of eighteen men stationed on the outside, with lighted torches in their
hands, and with orders to set fire to the four corners of the building,
and burn them alive, in case the Florida made her escape during the
night. But the morning came, and the Florida, fortunately for them if
not for us, was still at anchor. It would be inquiring somewhat too
curiously of weak human nature, to ask if the prisoners felt any thing
but joy at hearing of our fatal security. Captain Avalos and Mr. Dunn
(the secretary) told me afterwards, that during the night their guards
were cursing their tiresome watch, and wondering why Cambiaso did not
shoot them at once, or burn them, without waiting to know the result of
the governor’s escape. But Cambiaso was not so daring a villain as not
always to remember the possibility of the re-taking of the fort.

Early in the morning of the 27th, I sent my boat on shore, with the
first mate, Mr. Buela, the passenger, (he understanding Spanish,) three
seamen, and one soldier, with orders to bring off captain Avalos, and
to obtain from the governor orders with regard to the landing of the
rest of the prisoners. These also were seized the moment they arrived
at the barracks, and thrust into a little building about six feet
square.

The firing and disturbance during the night had roused some sense of
uneasiness in my mind, lest all should not be right on shore; and early
in the morning I had gone into the cabin to consult with Mr. Shaw. He
was then quite unwell, and most anxious to reach the shore, where he
supposed he would be able to obtain medical advice; while I hoped to
land all the prisoners during the day, and be able to proceed that
afternoon on our way to Rio Janeiro.

We waited very anxiously, therefore, for the return of the boat, and
at about nine o’clock she came alongside, but to my surprise, manned
with six or seven men dressed as officers, who handed me a letter
purporting to be from governor Gamero, stating that my men were
drunk, and not able to row the boat back to the ship. The letter also
requested me to commence landing the prisoners. All this seemed to me
very singular. I had never seen any disposition to drunkenness among
my crew, and even if the seamen had been incapable of returning in the
boat, the first mate and captain Avalos would have been on board of
her. I went into the cabin, and, holding out the letter to Mr. Shaw,
said “Depend upon it, there is something wrong here. My men are not
drunk, and if they are, where are Mr. P----n and captain Avalos?”
While I was speaking, a voice was heard on deck, the cabin door was
burst open, and four of the officers rushed in, two of them with drawn
swords. Mr. Shaw, who was sitting down, was seized at once. One of the
officers struck at me with his sword, but his arm was caught by one of
the prisoners, who rushed between us. In a few minutes I was secured,
in spite of my struggles, and we were told that we were prisoners.
I asked to whom, and by whose authority we were taken, but to this
I received no answer. We were carried on deck, and I found that the
prisoners had been freed. The struggle with the troops and the crew
was still going on, but as the prisoners rushed up from the hold, it
became every moment more unequal. The prisoners being unarmed, wrested
the guns from the hands of the soldiers, and overpowered them by force
of numbers. As I came on deck, the corporal called out that he would
not give up his gun unless I ordered him to, for it seems the guns had
at first been demanded of the soldiers by the officers who came from
the shore, and in the confusion some of them had given them up. As the
corporal called to me, three of the officers threw themselves upon him,
and after a long struggle he was disarmed, and put in irons. The whole
attack was so unexpected, the rush of the prisoners from the hold so
overwhelming, and the confusion so great, that I do not wonder that the
soldiers and crew were overpowered.

Preparations were soon made for sending Mr. Shaw and myself on shore,
and a sufficient guard was detached to accompany us in the boat. While
rowing to the shore, our captors were continually firing off their
muskets, with shouts of “Viva la Cruz!” These cries gave happened in
the colony, for they were the same which had met my ear during the
insurrection, (previous to my leaving Valparaiso,) of which struggle
I had been a witness. On leaving, we were met by several soldiers
on foot and horseback, one of whom seemed to be of some authority.
This was Garcia, one of the officers in the service of the governor,
Gamero, who had joined Cambiaso in his revolt, being compelled to do
so, as he afterwards pleaded, by fear of his life. However that may
be, I certainly found him much more gentle and humane in his actions
and expressions than Cambiaso, and was indebted to him for several
kindnesses. From him I gained the first idea of what had occurred in
the colony.

As we left the boat, I noticed Mr. Shaw’s extreme weakness, and feared
that if we were to be taken far from the shore, he would not be able
to stand the fatigue. I therefore appealed to general Garcia, as I
afterwards learned to call him, and, calling his attention to Mr.
Shaw’s state of health, asked him if some arrangement could not be made
by which he could ride. Garcia ordered one of his soldiers to dismount,
and Mr. Shaw took his place. We were taken up the slope from the water,
towards the barracks, and passing by the platform, under the mouths of
the cannon which were mounted upon it, entered the great gate of the
fortification. As I looked around, military preparations met my eye
on every side, but there was none of the order of a regular garrison;
on the contrary, the shouts of drunken rioters, the quarrelling and
swearing of the soldiers, the shrill screams of the women which
struck my ear, gave me a tolerably correct idea of the sort of people
into whose hands we had fallen. Conspicuous among them all, was their
leader, Cambiaso, who cast contemptuous glances upon us as we passed,
and who might be heard giving his orders, mixed with oaths and threats
of punishment and death to those who did not obey him implicitly. He
let us pass on, however, without addressing us, and it was only from
his officer’s dress and authoritative manner that we were able to guess
at his rank.

Very little time, however, was given us for observation; for we were
hurried across the open space, and thrust into one of the largest
buildings used as barracks. My crew, the remainder of whom were brought
away from the vessel at the same time with Mr. Shaw and myself, were
put into one of the smallest of the barracks, where they, with Mr.
Buela, were confined in a room about six feet square, which was so
crowded that they were obliged to take turns in lying down to rest. Mr.
Shaw and myself were at first put into the same apartment, but we were
not allowed to speak to each other; several soldiers standing guard
over us the whole time. In about two hours, however, I was taken from
this room, and put into a smaller one adjoining it. The apartment into
which both Mr. Shaw’s room and mine opened, was occupied by our guard,
who ate and slept there, and who forbade all intercourse between us.

I looked around the room, which I felt would be my prison until I was
led out to death, for I knew now into what hands we had fallen; and,
on my way up from the shore to the barracks, had been threatened with
death if I did not at once inform them what treasure I had on board the
Florida; and on my saying there was none, one of the officers said “he
would soon find a way to make me find some.”

The room was without a floor, with a board nailed to the wall, looking
like a shelf, but serving for a seat; the table was a board, supported
by sticks driven into the ground; and these, with my mattrass, formed
the furniture. I had with me a small pocket looking glass about the
size of my hand, and the miniatures of my wife and children, which I
managed to hide within my shirt bosom. I had also in my pocket a pencil
and a small piece of paper, which I used for the purpose of keeping my
dates. My guards, however, always came and watched me when they saw me
writing, and at last told me I must desist, as some harm might come of
it. After this, I put down my dates when I was unobserved. This was not
often. For the next two days I was near starving, nothing being given
me to eat, except two ship biscuit, or “hard bread,” as we sailors call
them; and my only drink was the water which I helped myself to from the
guard room.

On the morning of the 29th, two days after our capture, I was taken out
by my guard, for a walk around the yard and on the platform which ran
along the west side of the fort, and on which the cannon were mounted.
I made the best use of my eyes and ears during my walk, and managed to
speak to one or two of the prisoners who had been on the Florida with
me, and whom I had made some acquaintance with during the voyage. It
was by these prisoners that I was afterwards kept informed of what
occurred outside of my prison. They would talk to me during my walks,
and sometimes would come to my window and tell me what had occurred;
sometimes in bravado, and with great exultation, and sometimes with
expressions of sympathy.

On returning from my walk, I met Mr. Shaw, leaving his room with his
guard by his side; taken out, I supposed, for a similar purpose. I saw
he was not looking well, and spoke to him, saying, “how do you feel
this morning?” His answer was, “pretty miserable;” and he seemed about
to say something more, but my guard pushed between us, saying, with
an oath, “We can’t have any talking, captain; we have the general’s
orders against it.” I was hurried into my room, and Mr. Shaw led away.
This was the last time I ever saw him; for, for some reason which
I never could learn, he was not brought back to the barracks, but
confined in a building outside the fortification. It seemed to me, that
with the sense of his nearness to me, I had lost my last friend; so
lonely and miserable did I feel when he had left.




CHAPTER III.

  My prison--My guards--An English hymn book--A fellow
  prisoner--Capture of the Eliza Cornish--Fears of the English
  mate--Death of Mr. Shaw--Of Captain Talbot and boy--Barbarity of
  their execution--The Chilian prisoners sympathize with us--Cambiaso’s
  bravado--Captain Avalos and others led out to view the dead
  bodies--Treacherous betrayal of Governor Gamero--Execution of the
  traitor--My walk.


I now began to feel for a few days, some of the monotony of a
prisoner’s life. Shut up alone, without occupation, within hearing of
the riotous conversation of my guard, but forbidden to speak to them,
with hard fare, and no arrangements for my personal comfort or even
cleanliness, except when I could take water enough from the guard room
to wash my face, using my pocket handkerchief for a towel.

Three or four days had passed, and I had lost the fear of immediate
death, but my suspense and anxiety to know what Cambiaso’s intentions
with regard to us were, were very great. There seemed to me no motive
that he could have for keeping us prisoners, after he had satisfied
himself that we had no treasure on board the Florida, except the fear
that we would carry the news of his revolt back to Valparaiso; and
that danger to himself, it seemed to me, could be obviated only by
putting us to death. It was in vain that I applied to my guards; they
were evidently under orders to hold no communication with me, and the
prisoners who visited me from time to time, knew nothing of Cambiaso’s
plans. To my entreaties to be allowed to see Mr. Shaw, no answer was
given, except that it could not be allowed, that he had been sick, and
was now very unwell.

A few days after my imprisonment, an English book, containing prayers
and hymns, was handed me by one of my guard, a man named Preito, who
probably could make no use of it himself. The hymns had little poetical
merit, and probably at another time would scarcely have aroused my
attention; but now the promises and consolations of religion which
breathed through them, the spirit of Christian resignation and faith of
which I was then so much in need, and which to me shone out in every
part of them, were an unspeakable comfort. The first hymn to which I
opened, seemed so very applicable to my situation, that it impressed
itself upon my memory; and I insert it here, thinking that it may be
interesting to my readers to see how the promises of Christianity are
the truest consolation in all trials.

  To my complaint, O Lord, my God,
    Thy gracious ear incline;
  Hear me, distressed and destitute
    Of all relief but thine.

  Do thou, O God, preserve my soul
    That does thy name adore;
  Thy servant keep, and him whose trust
    Relies on thee, restore.

  To me, who daily thee invoke,
    Thy mercy, Lord, extend;
  Refresh thy servant’s soul, whose hopes
    On thee alone depend.

  To my repeated, humble prayer,
    O Lord, attentive be;
  When troubled, I on thee will call,
    For thou wilt answer me.

Some few days after Mr. Shaw’s removal from the barracks, one evening,
the exact date of which has escaped me entirely, I was aroused by a
great confusion in the fort, a noise of shouting, and, apparently, of
rejoicing. While I was standing at my window, trying to discover the
meaning of the uproar, my prison door was opened, and a man put in. He
was in sailor’s dress, was apparently an American, and looked terrified
and bewildered.

I accosted him immediately, in English--asked who he was, saying that
he was probably a prisoner, like myself. The guards in the next room
were in such a state of excitement that they allowed us to converse
unchecked.

He told me that he was the mate of an English brig, the Eliza Cornish,
of Liverpool, bound from Valparaiso to Liverpool; that the vessel had
anchored in Sandy Bay, intending to lay over for the night; that the
captain, Capt. Talbot, of Liverpool, had landed in the brig’s boat,
with a boy, a son of his owner, who was passenger on board, and one
or two seamen; that they had been seized and put in irons the moment
they were out of sight of the brig. The boat was then sent back to the
vessel, with five or six men in her, who came on board and told the
mate that the captain wanted him to come on shore; but that while he
was hesitating what to do, they, seeing the small number of the crew,
attacked and overpowered them, and took possession of the brig. They
then demanded of him whatever money was on board, threatening him
with instant death if he did not give it up at once. The brig had on
board about ninety or one hundred thousand dollars, in bars of gold
and silver, which they seized and brought on shore, together with the
mate and crew. Some of the bars of gold were cut up before his eyes,
and distributed around among the soldiers; and their exultation at the
sight of their booty had raised the general shout which I had heard.
This man was kept in my room during all the rest of our imprisonment.
He was a well meaning fellow, but evidently not much accustomed
to depend upon himself, and very much intimidated by the dread of
approaching death, by these rebels. I constantly found it necessary
to encourage him, and prevail upon him to show a bold face before our
captors, were it only to command their respect. For myself, I was not
really much afraid of them. I was afraid of dying, for my danger made
me realize how unfit I was for another world; and my dread of death
was such as a man might have during a dangerous illness.

At midnight, on December 2d, I was aroused from my sleep by the report
of muskets, of which they seemed to me to number about ten or twelve.
A short time afterwards there was another report, and our guards began
to run out of the next room. The whole encampment seemed in great
confusion, and I became alarmed, thinking some of our companions had
been shot, and that our turn was coming next. I dared not ask any
questions of the guard, some of whom I saw looking through the door of
our room, which always stood open at night. The mate of the E. Cornish
spoke to me, and said, “That is foul play, captain Brown; something
desperate is going on. I am afraid my captain and Mr. Shaw are gone for
it.” Then, throwing himself upon his face, he began to cry.

His manner gave me a feeling of impatience, and I answered him pretty
quickly that I did not doubt he was right, and that I supposed our turn
would come next, but I did not want to hear the thing talked about; and
at any rate, he might as well show as bold a face as possible, for the
guard were watching us, and listening to our conversation. This roused
him, and he sat up, and during the rest of the night we remained in
anxious suspense. I believe I was too proud to ask any questions of my
guard, nor would I allow the mate to ask any.

Soon after sunrise, some of the men who had come down with me as
prisoners, came into our room and whispered to me in Spanish, “Your
poor owner! poor English captain! poor English boy!” I questioned them
closely, and learned that Mr. Shaw and captain Talbot, with the young
passenger, had been taken from their beds just before midnight, put
in irons, both hands and feet, led out to a short distance from the
barracks, and there tied to a tree, and shot. I afterwards gathered
some particulars of their execution, which, for the sake of clearness,
I will insert here.

Mr. Shaw had been very sick ever since we were separated; and I was
told that on the 2d December he sent to Cambiaso, to ask if he might
have some medical advice. Cambiaso’s brutal reply was, “Pass him out
and shoot him, for we have no time to attend to the sick!” When they
were led out, captain Talbot entreated most earnestly that the boy’s
life might be spared, saying that he had been put under his care by his
parents, that he was a mere boy, and could do no harm; but his prayers
were not even listened to. He never asked once for his own life. The
boy was about eighteen years old, a son of one of the owners of the E.
Cornish, and had made the voyage as a pleasure excursion.

The first volley killed captain Talbot and the young man, leaving Mr.
Shaw standing unharmed, not a shot having touched him. Then a whole
volley was fired into him, killing him instantly. One of the soldiers
was attracted by the glitter of a diamond ring on Mr. Shaw’s finger,
and as soon as he was shot, the soldier went up to him, trying to
remove it; but finding that difficult, he cut off the finger with his
cutlass. This ring I afterwards heard of, as being seen on the finger
of one of the women about the fort, and on my return to Valparaiso,
I offered twenty-five dollars to recover it, thinking it would be
a gratification to Mr. Shaw’s friends to obtain even so slight a
remembrance of him, but I was not able to procure it. The bodies were
afterwards taken down and hung by the neck to a tree, exposed to all
the passers by.

I never knew why Mr. Shaw was shot, but I have every reason to suppose
that what I was told of Cambiaso’s reply to his request for medical
advice was the truth. It would have been too much trouble to take care
of a sick man. The same fear of trouble probably decided the poor boy’s
fate. Why captain Talbot was executed, while I was reserved, is also a
mystery to me. I never saw captain Talbot, but from his mate’s remarks
about him, I felt that he was a man of some spirit and character.
Perhaps his high spirit led him to say things that exasperated
Cambiaso. He gave some expression of this spirit at the time he was
seized. Two officers (Chilians,) were handling him rather roughly, when
he indignantly told them they need not look so surly, and at the same
time drew a dirk knife from the waist of his pantaloons. But it was
immediately taken from him.

Mr. Shaw’s death was a great shock to me, and is still a matter of
deep grief. We had been friends for some time, and I had the highest
respect for him. He was indeed a young man of great promise, and his
loss to his family and friends is one which cannot easily be replaced.
I grieved for them, even there in my prison, while I expected each
day to be my last, and while I remembered the agony of my own family,
when the news of our sad fate should reach them; and now that a kind
Providence has restored me to them, I grieve to remember him who met so
cruel a death from such barbarous hands, on a desert and far distant
shore.

I was told by one of the men who came into my cell that morning,
that the bodies were to be left hanging until we had all seen them.
Accordingly, about one o’clock that afternoon, three of the prisoners
(I think they were captain Avalos, with the captain of the regular
troops, and Mr. Dunn,) were taken from their prison, their irons
knocked off, and, when they were unshackled, Cambiaso walked up to
them, and with much mock politeness asked them to accompany him for
a walk. They were in no situation to refuse, but accompanied him in
silence, followed by a file of soldiers as guard. He led them out of
the barracks, toward the vessels. As they passed under the trees on
which hung the bodies of Mr. Shaw, captain Talbot, and the young lad,
Cambiaso pointed to them, and laughing, said, “You see what happens to
such villains when they fall into my hands; it will be your turn next.”
After compelling them to pass round the tree, so as to view the bodies
from every side, he conducted them back to the barracks and to their
crowded prison.
