Among the various Diseases affecting the EYES, there is one still[16]
unknown, which Practitioners have hitherto confounded with the _Gutta
Serena_.

These are its characteristic Symptoms:--The Eye (when touched) becomes
somewhat painful, without any apparent Cause; a Pression or Stiffness is
felt inwardly; the lateral Motions of its Globe are performed with
Difficulty; near situated Objects can no longer be seen; remote ones
alone are distinguished at a fixed Distance, and even these imperfectly.

This singular Affection of the Eye, which has yet no Name, but which may
be termed _Accidental Presbytopia_[17] or Long-sightedness, is ever the
fatal Consequence of taking prepared Mercury without proper Care.

When Calomel, Panacea, Sublimate corrosive, or any other Mercurial
Preparation in a saline Form, has been unseasonably administered, if not
immediately evacuated by Purgatives, it passes with the Chyle into the
Blood.

As it circulates, it unites with the _Mucus_, with which it has a more
intimate Affinity than with any other of our Humours. Afterwards it is
carried into the glandular Organs, there to be[18] secreted.

Whilst not yet united with the _Mucus_, if any of its Particles are of
too large a Bulk to pass freely through the minute capillary Vessels,
which it will have entered, it irritates their Coats with its sharp
Angles: the Vessels contract; their Diameter being diminished thereby,
the Lymph no longer permeates them freely; but, its Afflux continuing
the same, distends their Cavity. The distended Vessels soon compress
other minute adjacent ones; and these being obstructed and distended in
their Turn, the whole Texture of the Organ they form is tumefied.[19]

Where nervous Fibres and Blood Vessels concur to the Constitution of the
Organ, the Tumor is ever accompanied with a painful Inflammation.

Such being the Operation of prepared Mercury, it is capable of
disordering the Animal Œconomy in many Ways, according to the Functions
of the affected Parts. A complete Examination of them would swell these
Sheets beyond the proposed Size; I therefore reserve it for the Subject
of a future Publication. Here I confine myself to the Effects of
Mercurial Salts on the Organs of Vision, in Order to account for the
Phænomena of the Disease about which I am treating.

Mercurial Particles, carried into the minute Vessels of the ocular
Muscles, irritate them: Irritation is soon followed by Contraction and
Obstruction; thus the whole Substance of the Muscles becomes inflamed,
and their Bulk swelled. Hence from the inward Pression, Stiffness and
obtuse Pain, which are felt in this Disease.

That the Light’s Rays, which fall on the Eye, may express a distinct
Image on the[20] Choroïdes, they are to have their Focus thereon. This
cannot be effected, except when this Membrane is at a certain Distance
from the Lens; and this Distance is ever relative to the Position of
Objects.

Rays reflected by proximate Objects, being less refrangible, have their
Focus more distant from the Lens, than Rays reflected by remote ones. In
order to distinguish Objects at various Distances, the Soul therefore
approaches the Choroïdes to, or remove it from, the Crystaline; that is
to say, the Soul alters the Figure of the Eye:--An Alteration ever
effected by the Motions of ocular Muscles.

Thus, when the Motion of these Muscles is obstructed by their swelling,
it is plain that there is no being able to see clearly Objects at
several Distances.

When viewing remote Objects, the Eye is retracted towards the Bottom of
the Orbit by the Contraction of its strait Muscles; for as they
contract, these Muscles bring back the anterior Hemisphere of the Globe
(to which their Apponevroses are adhering) to the posterior one; they
thereby approach the Choroïdes to the Crystaline.

Thus the strait Muscles of the Eye being swelled and contracted by
irritating Mercurial Particles, Objects cannot be distinguished but at
one particular Distance.[21]

When viewing near Objects, the Eye, laterally compressed by its oblique
Muscles, seems to be forced out of the Orbit. Its Globe being thereby
lengthened, the Choroïdes is more distant from the Crystaline. But as
the Eye has only two oblique Muscles to four strait ones, when its
Muscles are all swelled to the same Degree, the Choroïdes is more
retracted towards the Crystaline by the former, than it is retracted
from by the latter.

Thus near situated Objects cannot be so clearly distinguished as the
remote.

When the oblique Muscles are not equally swelled in their whole Extent,
the Bottom of the Eye, pressed towards its Axis, forms no longer a
regular Circumference, whose Points are each equally distant from the
Lens. Therefore, of the Rays which fall on the Choroïdes, Part only have
thereon their Focus; the other are yet too divergent to express a
distinct Image.

Thus even remote Objects cannot be distinguished but imperfectly.

So far for the Investigation of the Nature and Cause of this Disease.

Having been hitherto mistaken for a _Gutta Serena_ by Practitioners, it
has accordingly been treated as such. Issues, Vomiting, Purging,
Salivation, have all, occasionally, been tried; but every Method yet
attempted to remove this Disorder, has been to no better Purpose than to
confirm it.
A rational Treatment of this Disease, I should imagine, cannot but be
acceptable to the Public; I therefore proceed to point it out.

The Indications for a radical Cure are three, relaxing, deobstructing,
and restoring to their due Tone the ocular Muscles.

In order that they may be relaxed, the Patient must avoid spirituous
Liquors, Tea, Coffee, Chocolate, Aromatics, great Exercise, and violent
Passions. He also must observe a low Diet; his only Drink, for a while,
ought to be either Barley-water, Whey, Marsh-mallows Infusion, or
Orgeate.

Regimen being prescribed, the Cure is to be attempted by a moderate
Bleeding at the Foot, which is to be repeated once every Week.

Every Day (except those of Bleeding) the Patient should take, for a
whole Month, two, three, or four Drachms of Cassia, according to the
Strength of his Constitution.

When his Fluids are well diluted, antispasmodic Suffumigations[22] are
to be conveyed to the Eyes by a proper Instrument. Emollient[23]
Pultises are likewise to be applied to the temporal Regions.

These being made Use of, the Swelling of the ocular Muscles gives Way by
Degrees, the obtuse Pain vanishes, the Globe of the Eye collapses, and
Vision begins to be restored.

Then some electrical[24]Sparks are to be drawn from the Canthi of the
Eyes, Morning and Evening, during a few Weeks. Mean while, a Plaister of
_Tacamahaca_ is to be worn on the Temples. These Remedies being
calculated to remove all Obstruction of the affected Parts, promote the
restoring of the Sight, and complete the second Indication.

When Vision is nearly[25] in its former State, there remains only a
Weakness of Sight, which is gradually removed by often washing the Eyes
with fresh Water alone.

Such is the Method I have pursued to perform the following Cures, being
the only ones of the Kind I ever attempted.

_Charlotte Blondel_ (the only Daughter of a Merchant in _Paris_,) a girl
of about Eleven Years of Age, and of a delicate Constitution, being
troubled with Worms, Mercurial Cakes were prescribed to her; and
although she had been purged, now and then, during the Course of this
Remedy, a Salivation came on. Soon after her Head swelled, and her Sight
was altered in such a Manner that she could hardly distinguish any
Object.

In order to conquer Salivation, purging was repeated every Day. It
indeed soon diminished; so likewise did the Swelling of the Head: The
Sight also was somewhat better. By following the Use of the same
Laxative, every Symptom at last disappeared, except the Alteration of
Vision; for she could only see Objects at a Distance.

The Parents, uneasy on their Daughter’s Account, applied to a famous
Oculist, who declined undertaking the Cure.

Afterwards Application was made to a Fryar, of some Repute for curing
Diseases of the Eyes. He gave it as his Advice, that the Patient was
afflicted with a _Gutta Serena_, and attended her for Seven Months
together, prescribing at first sudorific Drinkings, and at last ammoniac
Suffumigations, which produced no other Effect but to inflame the Eyes.

The Patient was already given over, when I undertook her Cure. As I was
not unversed in Optics, and had seen several People affected in the same
Manner, I soon was made sensible her Case had not been understood.

Considering the Swelling of the ocular Muscles as the true Cause of this
Disease, I was convinced that the only Remedies to be employed at first
were Laxatives and Emollients. Accordingly, having fixed upon a cooling
Diet, I prescribed two Drachms of Cassia to be taken fasting every
Morning, for three Weeks together, and Infusion of Marsh-mallows for her
Diet-drink. Seeing that the Patient had a Disgust to this Infusion, Whey
was substituted to it.

My Patient received no Change in her Vision for Fourteen Nights, but
afterwards found a little Benefit. In order to ascertain it in Future,
I framed a Scale, whereon I marked the nearest Distance she could tell
the Hour by a Watch. The Distance was Eight-and-Twenty Inches.

Judging the Use of Cassia had been continued long enough, I advised
Marsh-mallows Suffumigations to be taken twice a Day, and a soft Pultis
of the _Quatre Farines_ to be applied to her Temples. These were used
for a whole Month, at the latter End of which the Scale was reduced to
Twenty-two Inches; that is, the Patient could tell the Hour by the same
Watch at Twenty-two Inches Distance.

As her Humours appeared well diluted, in order to remove the Obstruction
of the ocular Muscles, and promote the reducing of their Bulk, I desired
to have some Sparks drawn from the Canthi of her Eyes, but was opposed
by her Mother, who having imbibed a strong Prejudice against such
Remedy, never would consent to it. Here I took Leave of my Patient.

Ten Days after I was sent for by her Father, who, after a short Apology,
told me, “if I was still of Opinion that Electrization would be of any
Service to his Daughter, my Advice should be followed.” I answered in
the Affirmative.

The next Morning a few Sparks were drawn accordingly. However, to
estimate the Effect of the electrical Fluid in this Case, I previously
repeated the Observation with the Watch, and found no Alteration in my
Patient’s Sight, since I had discontinued to attend her.
In the Evening a few Sparks likewise were drawn. The same was repeated
for many a Day, having Care, at every Time, to increase the Number of
Sparks.

She advanced but slowly towards her Recovery; for at the Beginning of
the fourth Week the Scale was reduced only to 18 Inches.

Astonished at so inconsiderable a Progress, I allowed some Intermission
to my Patient. During that Time, enquiring into what could have checked
the Efficacy of a Remedy I so much relied upon, I made the following
Reflection:--That since electrical Sparks acted only as stimulating,
they possibly could neither deobstruct nor reduce swelled Parts, as long
as there was a Redundancy of Blood. To diminish its Mass, I therefore
had Recourse to Bleeding, and the next Day Electrization was re-assumed.

The Event justified my Expectation; for drawing Sparks had not been
continued eight Days, but the Scale was reduced to 13 Inches.

I had then a Mind to repeat Bleeding, but was obliged to postpone it, on
Account of the Weakness of my Patient.

Having been bled a second Time, a Plaister of _Tacamahaca_ was applied
to both her Temples, and Electrization continued. A few Days after the
Scale was reduced to Nine Inches.

These Remedies were made Use of three Weeks longer; but, seeing no
farther Reduction of the Scale, I judged the Vision to be nearly
restored to its original State. The stimulating Plaister and
Electrization were then left off.

For a while there remained to the Patient an Incapacity of fixing
Objects. As this was entirely dependant on the Weakness of the ocular
Muscles, I prescribed Lotions with cold Water mixed with a few[26] Drops
of HOFFMAN’S _Balsam Vitæ_, which at last perfected the Cure.

_D. B._ a Merchant in _London_, having contracted a virulent Gonorrhœa
and Bubo, applied to a Surgeon of Repute, who (suspecting the whole Mass
of Humours infected with the Venereal Taint) administered to him
corrosive Sublimate in Spirits of Wine.

In order to keep his Body open, a Dose of Jalap indeed was given now and
then: But as this Purgative is of a drastic[27] Kind, and as the Patient
observed no Sort of Regimen (enjoying his Bottle as freely as before) a
violent Salivation came on; which however, by timely Assistance, was
soon conquered.

The Use of corrosive Sublimate had been re-assumed but a few Days, when
the Patient having made an Excess in Drinking, his Running suddenly
disappeared, and in Four-and-Twenty Hours broke out in the small Canthus
of the Left Eye: both Eyes became inflamed, and the whole Face swelled.

The next Day the Opthalmia was such as the Patient could not bear Day’s
Light. For a while he kept his Eyes shut; and when he did open them, it
was only to be sensible that his Sight was nearly lost.

It was long before the Opthalmia was entirely discussed; but when it was
so, the Vision was much affected, for the Patient could see no Objects
except at a Distance; and those only partially, their Image being
incompleat.

In his Vexation at this, he discharged the Surgeon who attended him, and
applied to another.

In order to restore his Sight, Purges with Calomel were frequently
given, and a Blister kept open on the Neck; but to no Effect.

A Discharge at the Nose was at last promoted by Powders _Errhynes_ and
Volatile Salts: These excited a fresh inflammation, and rendered the
Disease worse.

The Patient had laboured Seven Months under these disagreeable
Circumstances, when he put himself under my Care.

As he was of a sanguine Habit, I had him bled twice the first Day:
Afterwards I prescribed a cooling Diet, and kept his Body open with
gentle Laxatives.

For Fourteen Nights together no other Benefit was received, except that
the Eyes were less painful when touched; but during the Course of the
third Week, the affected Parts were quite easy: Objects indeed were not
distinguished at a nearer Distance, but their image was not so much
mutilated.

I then had the Patient bled again, and employed emollient Suffumigations
and Pultises. These being continued for Fourteen Nights, a great Change
was produced in Vision; the image of Objects was no longer mutilated.

Bleeding was repeated. The next Day the Patient re-assumed his
Laxatives, which he continued for a whole Week. Afterwards he was
electrified in the Manner already described, and a Plaister of
_Tacamahaca_ was applied to his Temples.

Stimulating Plaisters, drawing Sparks, and diluting Infusions, removed
in Five Weeks all Obstruction and Swelling of the ocular Muscles. The
Sight being thus restored, frequent Lotions with cold Water alone soon
compleated his Cure.

In _January 1773, J. P._ Esq; took Sublimate Corrosive dissolved in
Spirit of Wine, with a view of eradicating a stubborn Gleet. As no Care
had been taken to keep his Body open, a Salivation came on. When under
this Circumstance, he inconsiderately took a Morning Ride, in a sharp
Northerly Wind. At his Return Home he was seized with a sort of Quinsey:
His face swelled to a monstrous Size, and his Eyes were inflamed.

To relieve him, frequent Doses of Jalap were given.

As the Patient could bear no vivid Light, and was in Danger to be
suffocated whilst lying in Bed, he passed Night and Day on an elbow
Chair, in a darkened Room.

When the dreadful Symptoms disappeared, on again admitting Light into
his Room, he was apprehensive of having lost his Sight, but was soon
made sensible that it was only altered, for there was left to him a
Sensation of Objects at a certain Distance.

Too long and tedious would be the Narration of the various Remedies,
which were vainly employed in order to restore the Organ of Vision. I
shall only observe that, when I was applied to, the Patient had laboured
nearly Two Years under that cruel Disorder; and so weak was the
Impression of Objects on his Left Eye, that I looked upon the Success of
my Attempt as at best very doubtful.

Upon examining how far the natural Focus of the Rays of Light had been
changed, I found that my Patient could not possibly see the Hour on a
Watch, clearly, at any Distance whatever; but that he saw it less
imperfectly when the Watch was at Thirty-two Inches Distance:--An
Alteration of Vision the greatest I have ever known.

To add to his Misfortune, the Patient was of a scorbutic Habit; so I had
two Diseases to attack instead of one.

The first Thing to be done in this Case was, undoubtedly, diluting and
purifying the Humours; but among the antiscorbutic Remedies, such were
to be carefully avoided as were impregnated with acrid principles; for
Example, Water-cresses, bitter Plants, Tar-water, _Harrowgate_ Water,
Chalybeate Water, Elixir of Vitriol, Spirit of Sea Salt, &c. being all
diametrically opposite to the aimed-at Relaxation of the rigid Parts.
Accordingly I prescribed Whey and Apple-water for the sole Diet-drink,
with Milk and fresh Vegetables for Food.

Not daring to venture even a small Bleeding, on Account of my Patient’s
emaciated state of Health, I judged it proper to diminish the Mass of
Blood, by keeping his Body open with Cassia and Tamarinds.

This Method had the desired Effect. Not only the scorbutic symptoms
disappeared in Five Weeks, but one Eye was somewhat better.

No Alteration was made in the Diet; but, as the Patient’s Constitution
was then not so much debilitated, I prescribed Laxatives more
frequently: I likewise begun using emollient Suffumigations and
Pultises. They proved so effectual as to reduce the Scale to
Twenty-three Inches in Fourteen Nights.

The Patient daily gathering strength, I was no longer apprehensive of
any bad Effect from Bleeding, and accordingly had him bled.
Suffumigations and Pultises were continued three Weeks more, and during
the interval the Scale was reduced to Sixteen Inches.

I had him bled again, and afterwards electrified. The twelfth Day the
Scale was reduced to Ten Inches.

By continuing Electrization, Laxatives and _Tacamahaca_ Plaister a
Month longer, the Scale was further reduced One Inch and a Half.

Judging that Vision was almost restored to its pristine state, I advised
him, for the bracing it, Lotions with cold Water alone. I must confess,
however, that ever since the Left Eye has remained weak.

These are the Cures[28] performed by my Method. They indeed are not
numerous, but are sufficient to prove the Attempt as safe as it is
rational: And whenever this Method shall be employed with Judgment, I
have no Doubt but it will be attended with the same Success. But even
allowing there is still much Room for Improvement, was the Question put
to me, _Why I offer it now to the Public?_ my Answer is plain--_Because
the actual Practise of treating this Disease is evidently wrong._--Thus
pursuing a wrong Plan, not only the Hopes of the Patient are frustrated,
but his Case becomes desperate.

If one cannot always be the happy instrument of alleviating the Misery
of the Unfortunate, it is, however, a sort of service tendered to them,
to prevent their being made worse. On this Consideration I claim the
indulgence of the Public.